SECURITY.md, before:

# Security Model

This document describes the security architecture, threat model, and defensive measures implemented in the Agentic Wallet System.

## Security Principles

1. **Least Privilege**: Components only have necessary permissions
2. **Defense in Depth**: Multiple layers of security controls
3. **Secure by Default**: Restrictive defaults, explicit opt-in
4. **Auditable**: All actions logged and traceable
5. **Fail Secure**: Errors result in denial, not bypass

## Threat Model

### Assets to Protect

1. **Private Keys**: Most critical - loss means loss of funds
2. **Wallet Balances**: SOL and SPL tokens under management
3. **System Integrity**: Correct operation of agents
4. **Data Confidentiality**: Transaction history, balances

### Threat Actors

| Actor | Capability | Motivation |
|-------|-----------|------------|
| External Attacker | Network access | Financial gain |
| Malicious Agent Code | Agent context access | Unauthorized transfers |
| Compromised Frontend | API access | Key exfiltration |
| Insider Threat | Full system access | Financial gain |

### Attack Vectors

#### 1. Key Extraction
**Threat**: Attacker extracts private keys from memory or storage

**Mitigations**:
- Keys encrypted at rest with AES-256-GCM
- Keys decrypted only momentarily for signing (<10ms)
- No key persistence in plaintext
- Secure key derivation with scrypt
- Memory cleared after signing

```typescript
// Key is only decrypted for signing, then discarded
const secretKey = decrypt(wallet.encryptedSecretKey, secret);
const keypair = Keypair.fromSecretKey(secretKey);
transaction.sign(keypair);
// secretKey falls out of scope, eligible for GC
```

#### 2. Agent Compromise
**Threat**: Malicious agent code attempts unauthorized actions

**Mitigations**:
- Agents have NO cryptographic capabilities
- Intent-based communication (agents emit wishes, not commands)
- Policy engine validates all intents
- Rate limiting on transfers
- Balance minimums enforced

```typescript
// Agent CANNOT do this:
wallet.secretKey  // ❌ Not exposed
signTransaction() // ❌ Not available

// Agent CAN only do this:
return { type: 'transfer_sol', amount: 0.1, recipient: '...' }
return { type: 'transfer_token', mint: '...', amount: 10, recipient: '...' }
// Both intent types are validated by the same policy engine
```

#### 3. Frontend Attack
**Threat**: XSS or compromised frontend attempts key theft

**Mitigations**:
- Frontend never receives key material
- API only exposes public information
- CORS configured for specific origins (GET, POST, PATCH)
- Agent creation and configuration go through server-side validation
- Strategy parameters validated by Zod schemas in the Strategy Registry
- `executionSettings` bounds enforced server-side (min cycle 5 s, max 1 h)

```typescript
// API Response - Safe
{
  id: "wallet_abc123",
  publicKey: "7xKXt...",  // ✓ Public
  balance: 1.5            // ✓ Public
}

// Never returned
{
  secretKey: "...",       // ❌ Never exposed
  encryptedSecretKey: "..." // ❌ Never exposed
}
```

#### 4. Network Attacks
**Threat**: Man-in-the-middle, replay attacks

**Mitigations**:
- HTTPS in production
- Solana transaction signatures
- Blockhash validity windows
- Transaction deduplication

#### 5. Denial of Service
**Threat**: Resource exhaustion

**Mitigations**:
- Agent count limits
- Rate limiting on API endpoints
- Transaction retry limits
- Daily transfer limits per wallet

## Security Boundaries

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    UNTRUSTED ZONE                        │
│                                                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐    │
│  │  Frontend   │  │   Agent     │  │  External    │    │
│  │  (Browser)  │  │   Logic     │  │  BYOA Agent  │    │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └──────────────┘    │
│         │                │                │              │
│         │ API            │ Intent         │ Bearer Token │
│         │ (read-only)    │                │ + Intent     │
│         ▼                ▼                ▼              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                    TRUST BOUNDARY                        │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                    TRUSTED ZONE                          │
│                                                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐    │
│  │   Policy    │  │   Wallet    │  │  Integration │    │
│  │  Validator  │  │  Manager    │  │  Layer       │    │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └──────────────┘    │
│         │                │                │              │
│         │                │ Encrypted Keys │ Token hashes │
│         ▼                ▼                ▼              │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐            │
│  │              Secure Storage              │            │
│  │         (AES-256-GCM encrypted)         │            │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────┘            │
│                                                          │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## BYOA (Bring Your Own Agent) Security Model

### Why External Agents Cannot Access Keys

The BYOA integration layer is designed so that external agents **never** hold or
observe private key material. This is enforced at multiple levels:

1. **Control Tokens ≠ Keys**: The control token authenticates intents but cannot
   sign transactions. It is a bearer token only.
2. **Intent Boundary**: External agents submit high-level intents
   (`REQUEST_AIRDROP`, `TRANSFER_SOL`, `TRANSFER_TOKEN`, `QUERY_BALANCE`), not raw transactions.
   The platform converts intents to transactions internally.
3. **Wallet Isolation**: Each external agent is bound to exactly one wallet.
   An agent's token cannot access any other agent's wallet.
4. **Token Storage**: Control tokens are immediately hashed (SHA-256) upon
   registration. The raw token is returned once and never stored.

### Intent-Based Isolation

```
External Agent                     Platform
     │                                │
     │  "I want to send 0.5 SOL      │
     │   to address XYZ"             │
     │───────────────────────────────►│
     │                                │  1. Authenticate token
     │                                │  2. Verify intent in supported set
     │                                │  3. Rate limit check
     │                                │  4. Policy validation (max amount, daily limit)
     │                                │  5. Build transaction (RPC layer)
     │                                │  6. Sign transaction (wallet layer - keys here only)
     │                                │  7. Submit to Solana
     │  { status: "executed",         │
     │    signature: "abc..." }       │
     │◄───────────────────────────────│
```

The external agent only sees:
- ✓ Their wallet's public key
- ✓ Their wallet's balance
- ✓ Intent execution results (success/failure)

They never see:
- ✗ Private keys (encrypted, internal only)
- ✗ Other agents' wallets
- ✗ Raw transaction bytes
- ✗ Encryption secrets

### Rate Limiting

BYOA intents are rate-limited per agent:
- **30 intents per minute** per agent (sliding window)
- **Daily transfer limits** enforced by the policy engine
- **Maximum transfer amounts** per the wallet's policy

### Revocation

Agents can be permanently revoked via `POST /api/byoa/agents/:id/revoke`.
Once revoked:
- The token hash is deleted from the index
- All subsequent intent submissions are rejected
- The wallet remains but is no longer controllable

## Policy Engine

The policy engine validates all agent intents:

```typescript
interface Policy {
  maxTransferAmount: number;    // Max per transaction (default: 1 SOL)
  maxDailyTransfers: number;    // Per wallet (default: 100)
  requireMinBalance: number;    // Min balance to maintain (default: 0.01 SOL)
  allowedRecipients?: string[]; // Whitelist (optional)
  blockedRecipients?: string[]; // Blacklist (optional)
}
```

**Validation Process**:
```
Intent → Policy Check → Balance Check → Rate Limit Check → Execute/Reject
```

## Key Storage

Keys are encrypted using:
- **Algorithm**: AES-256-GCM (authenticated encryption)
- **Key Derivation**: scrypt (N=16384, r=8, p=1)
- **Salt**: 32 bytes random per key
- **IV**: 16 bytes random per encryption

```typescript
// Encryption format: salt:iv:authTag:ciphertext (base64)
function encrypt(data: Uint8Array, passphrase: string): string {
  const salt = randomBytes(32);
  const key = scryptSync(passphrase, salt, 32);
  const iv = randomBytes(16);
  
  const cipher = createCipheriv('aes-256-gcm', key, iv);
  const encrypted = cipher.update(data);
  const authTag = cipher.getAuthTag();
  
  return Buffer.concat([salt, iv, authTag, encrypted]).toString('base64');
}
```

## Logging and Audit

All security-relevant events are logged:

```typescript
// Sensitive data is automatically redacted
logger.info('Transaction signed', {
  walletId: 'wallet_123',
  signature: 'abc...',
  secretKey: '[REDACTED]'  // Auto-redacted
});
```

**Logged Events**:
- Wallet creation
- Transaction signing
- Policy validation (pass/fail)
- Agent status changes
- API requests

## Network Security (Devnet)

This system is designed for **Devnet only**:

```typescript
if (config.SOLANA_NETWORK === 'mainnet-beta') {
  throw new Error('Mainnet is not supported for safety');
}
```

**Mainnet Production Requirements** (not implemented):
- Hardware Security Module (HSM) integration
- Multi-signature requirements
- Formal security audit
- Rate limiting infrastructure
- Key rotation procedures
- Incident response plan

## Security Checklist

### Implemented ✓
- [x] Encrypted key storage
- [x] Agent isolation from keys
- [x] Policy-based validation
- [x] Read-only frontend (no key exposure)
- [x] Input validation (Zod) for all API endpoints
- [x] Secure logging (exact-match redaction of sensitive fields)
- [x] Rate limiting (daily transfers)
- [x] Balance minimums
- [x] BYOA control token hashing (SHA-256)
- [x] BYOA timing-safe token comparison (`crypto.timingSafeEqual`)
- [x] BYOA per-agent rate limiting (30/min)
- [x] BYOA intent validation against supported set
- [x] BYOA 1-wallet-per-agent isolation
- [x] BYOA agent revocation
- [x] Strategy Registry param validation (Zod schemas per strategy)
- [x] Execution settings bounds (cycle 5 s–1 h, actions 1–10 000)
- [x] SPL token transfer (`transfer_token`) validated by the same policy engine as `transfer_sol`
- [x] SPL token transfers require wallet-layer signing (agents never access keys)
- [x] Unhandled rejection / uncaught exception handlers
- [x] Production-mode encryption secret validation
- [x] Request body size limit (100 KB)

### Recommended for Production
- [ ] HSM integration
- [ ] TLS/HTTPS everywhere
- [ ] API authentication
- [ ] Multi-signature wallets
- [ ] Key rotation
- [ ] Backup/recovery procedures
- [ ] Security monitoring
- [ ] Penetration testing
- [ ] Formal audit

## Incident Response

If you suspect a security breach:

1. **Stop all agents immediately**
2. **Revoke any exposed secrets**
3. **Audit transaction history**
4. **Review access logs**
5. **Report to security team**

## Responsible Disclosure

If you discover a security vulnerability:
1. **Do not** disclose publicly
2. Email security@example.com
3. Include reproduction steps
4. Allow 90 days for fix

## References

- [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/Top10/)
- [Solana Security Best Practices](https://docs.solana.com/security)
- [Node.js Security Checklist](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/security/)

Commit message:

docs: update all documentation for AUTONOMOUS intent, global intent history, and policy bypass
- ARCHITECTURE.md: Added AUTONOMOUS to Intent union, intent history recording flow, /api/intents endpoint, IntentRouter recordIntent() docs
- DEEP_DIVE.md: Added AUTONOMOUS to supported intents table, autonomy spectrum column, Future Directions checkmarks
- README.md: Added AUTONOMOUS feature bullet, /api/intents endpoint, updated BYOA example and intent types table with policy column
- SECURITY.md: Documented autonomous policy bypass, updated BYOA intent list, added checklist items for audit trail
- SKILLS.md: Added autonomous intent schema with params, AUTONOMOUS to BYOA intents, /api/intents endpoint to API schema

SECURITY.md, after:

# Security Model

This document describes the security architecture, threat model, and defensive measures implemented in the Agentic Wallet System.

## Security Principles

1. **Least Privilege**: Components only have necessary permissions
2. **Defense in Depth**: Multiple layers of security controls
3. **Secure by Default**: Restrictive defaults, explicit opt-in
4. **Auditable**: All actions logged and traceable
5. **Fail Secure**: Errors result in denial, not bypass

## Threat Model

### Assets to Protect

1. **Private Keys**: Most critical - loss means loss of funds
2. **Wallet Balances**: SOL and SPL tokens under management
3. **System Integrity**: Correct operation of agents
4. **Data Confidentiality**: Transaction history, balances

### Threat Actors

| Actor | Capability | Motivation |
|-------|-----------|------------|
| External Attacker | Network access | Financial gain |
| Malicious Agent Code | Agent context access | Unauthorized transfers |
| Compromised Frontend | API access | Key exfiltration |
| Insider Threat | Full system access | Financial gain |

### Attack Vectors

#### 1. Key Extraction
**Threat**: Attacker extracts private keys from memory or storage

**Mitigations**:
- Keys encrypted at rest with AES-256-GCM
- Keys decrypted only momentarily for signing (<10ms)
- No key persistence in plaintext
- Secure key derivation with scrypt
- Memory cleared after signing

```typescript
// Key is only decrypted for signing, then discarded
const secretKey = decrypt(wallet.encryptedSecretKey, secret);
const keypair = Keypair.fromSecretKey(secretKey);
transaction.sign(keypair);
// secretKey falls out of scope, eligible for GC
```

#### 2. Agent Compromise
**Threat**: Malicious agent code attempts unauthorized actions

**Mitigations**:
- Agents have NO cryptographic capabilities
- Intent-based communication (agents emit wishes, not commands)
- Policy engine validates all intents
- Rate limiting on transfers
- Balance minimums enforced

```typescript
// Agent CANNOT do this:
wallet.secretKey  // ❌ Not exposed
signTransaction() // ❌ Not available

// Agent CAN only do this:
return { type: 'transfer_sol', amount: 0.1, recipient: '...' }
return { type: 'transfer_token', mint: '...', amount: 10, recipient: '...' }
return { type: 'autonomous', action: 'transfer_sol', params: { amount: 0.5, recipient: '...' } }
// All intent types are validated by the same policy engine
// EXCEPT 'autonomous', which bypasses policy checks by design
```

#### 3. Frontend Attack
**Threat**: XSS or compromised frontend attempts key theft

**Mitigations**:
- Frontend never receives key material
- API only exposes public information
- CORS configured for specific origins (GET, POST, PATCH)
- Agent creation and configuration go through server-side validation
- Strategy parameters validated by Zod schemas in the Strategy Registry
- `executionSettings` bounds enforced server-side (min cycle 5 s, max 1 h)

```typescript
// API Response - Safe
{
  id: "wallet_abc123",
  publicKey: "7xKXt...",  // ✓ Public
  balance: 1.5            // ✓ Public
}

// Never returned
{
  secretKey: "...",       // ❌ Never exposed
  encryptedSecretKey: "..." // ❌ Never exposed
}
```

#### 4. Network Attacks
**Threat**: Man-in-the-middle, replay attacks

**Mitigations**:
- HTTPS in production
- Solana transaction signatures
- Blockhash validity windows
- Transaction deduplication

#### 5. Denial of Service
**Threat**: Resource exhaustion

**Mitigations**:
- Agent count limits
- Rate limiting on API endpoints
- Transaction retry limits
- Daily transfer limits per wallet

## Security Boundaries

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    UNTRUSTED ZONE                        │
│                                                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐    │
│  │  Frontend   │  │   Agent     │  │  External    │    │
│  │  (Browser)  │  │   Logic     │  │  BYOA Agent  │    │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └──────────────┘    │
│         │                │                │              │
│         │ API            │ Intent         │ Bearer Token │
│         │ (read-only)    │                │ + Intent     │
│         ▼                ▼                ▼              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                    TRUST BOUNDARY                        │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│                    TRUSTED ZONE                          │
│                                                          │
│  ┌─────────────┐  ┌─────────────┐  ┌──────────────┐    │
│  │   Policy    │  │   Wallet    │  │  Integration │    │
│  │  Validator  │  │  Manager    │  │  Layer       │    │
│  └─────────────┘  └─────────────┘  └──────────────┘    │
│         │                │                │              │
│         │                │ Encrypted Keys │ Token hashes │
│         ▼                ▼                ▼              │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐            │
│  │              Secure Storage              │            │
│  │         (AES-256-GCM encrypted)         │            │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────┘            │
│                                                          │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## BYOA (Bring Your Own Agent) Security Model

### Why External Agents Cannot Access Keys

The BYOA integration layer is designed so that external agents **never** hold or
observe private key material. This is enforced at multiple levels:

1. **Control Tokens ≠ Keys**: The control token authenticates intents but cannot
   sign transactions. It is a bearer token only.
2. **Intent Boundary**: External agents submit high-level intents
   (`REQUEST_AIRDROP`, `TRANSFER_SOL`, `TRANSFER_TOKEN`, `QUERY_BALANCE`, `AUTONOMOUS`), not raw transactions.
   The platform converts intents to transactions internally.
   **Note**: `AUTONOMOUS` intents bypass the policy engine but are still fully
   logged and rate-limited. The agent still never touches private keys.
3. **Wallet Isolation**: Each external agent is bound to exactly one wallet.
   An agent's token cannot access any other agent's wallet.
4. **Token Storage**: Control tokens are immediately hashed (SHA-256) upon
   registration. The raw token is returned once and never stored.

### Intent-Based Isolation

```
External Agent                     Platform
     │                                │
     │  "I want to send 0.5 SOL      │
     │   to address XYZ"             │
     │───────────────────────────────►│
     │                                │  1. Authenticate token
     │                                │  2. Verify intent in supported set
     │                                │  3. Rate limit check
     │                                │  4. Policy validation (max amount, daily limit)
     │                                │  5. Build transaction (RPC layer)
     │                                │  6. Sign transaction (wallet layer - keys here only)
     │                                │  7. Submit to Solana
     │  { status: "executed",         │
     │    signature: "abc..." }       │
     │◄───────────────────────────────│
```

The external agent only sees:
- ✓ Their wallet's public key
- ✓ Their wallet's balance
- ✓ Intent execution results (success/failure)

They never see:
- ✗ Private keys (encrypted, internal only)
- ✗ Other agents' wallets
- ✗ Raw transaction bytes
- ✗ Encryption secrets

### Rate Limiting

BYOA intents are rate-limited per agent:
- **30 intents per minute** per agent (sliding window)
- **Daily transfer limits** enforced by the policy engine
- **Maximum transfer amounts** per the wallet's policy

### Revocation

Agents can be permanently revoked via `POST /api/byoa/agents/:id/revoke`.
Once revoked:
- The token hash is deleted from the index
- All subsequent intent submissions are rejected
- The wallet remains but is no longer controllable

## Policy Engine

The policy engine validates all agent intents:

```typescript
interface Policy {
  maxTransferAmount: number;    // Max per transaction (default: 1 SOL)
  maxDailyTransfers: number;    // Per wallet (default: 100)
  requireMinBalance: number;    // Min balance to maintain (default: 0.01 SOL)
  allowedRecipients?: string[]; // Whitelist (optional)
  blockedRecipients?: string[]; // Blacklist (optional)
}
```

**Validation Process**:
```
Intent → Policy Check → Balance Check → Rate Limit Check → Execute/Reject
```

## Key Storage

Keys are encrypted using:
- **Algorithm**: AES-256-GCM (authenticated encryption)
- **Key Derivation**: scrypt (N=16384, r=8, p=1)
- **Salt**: 32 bytes random per key
- **IV**: 16 bytes random per encryption

```typescript
// Encryption format: salt:iv:authTag:ciphertext (base64)
function encrypt(data: Uint8Array, passphrase: string): string {
  const salt = randomBytes(32);
  const key = scryptSync(passphrase, salt, 32);
  const iv = randomBytes(16);
  
  const cipher = createCipheriv('aes-256-gcm', key, iv);
  const encrypted = cipher.update(data);
  const authTag = cipher.getAuthTag();
  
  return Buffer.concat([salt, iv, authTag, encrypted]).toString('base64');
}
```

## Logging and Audit

All security-relevant events are logged:

```typescript
// Sensitive data is automatically redacted
logger.info('Transaction signed', {
  walletId: 'wallet_123',
  signature: 'abc...',
  secretKey: '[REDACTED]'  // Auto-redacted
});
```

**Logged Events**:
- Wallet creation
- Transaction signing
- Policy validation (pass/fail)
- Agent status changes
- API requests

## Network Security (Devnet)

This system is designed for **Devnet only**:

```typescript
if (config.SOLANA_NETWORK === 'mainnet-beta') {
  throw new Error('Mainnet is not supported for safety');
}
```

**Mainnet Production Requirements** (not implemented):
- Hardware Security Module (HSM) integration
- Multi-signature requirements
- Formal security audit
- Rate limiting infrastructure
- Key rotation procedures
- Incident response plan

## Security Checklist

### Implemented ✓
- [x] Encrypted key storage
- [x] Agent isolation from keys
- [x] Policy-based validation
- [x] Read-only frontend (no key exposure)
- [x] Input validation (Zod) for all API endpoints
- [x] Secure logging (exact-match redaction of sensitive fields)
- [x] Rate limiting (daily transfers)
- [x] Balance minimums
- [x] BYOA control token hashing (SHA-256)
- [x] BYOA timing-safe token comparison (`crypto.timingSafeEqual`)
- [x] BYOA per-agent rate limiting (30/min)
- [x] BYOA intent validation against supported set
- [x] BYOA 1-wallet-per-agent isolation
- [x] BYOA agent revocation
- [x] Strategy Registry param validation (Zod schemas per strategy)
- [x] Execution settings bounds (cycle 5 s–1 h, actions 1–10 000)
- [x] SPL token transfer (`transfer_token`) validated by the same policy engine as `transfer_sol`
- [x] SPL token transfers require wallet-layer signing (agents never access keys)
- [x] AUTONOMOUS intent type: policy bypass is intentional, documented, and fully logged
- [x] Global intent history (`/api/intents`) provides unified audit trail for all intent types
- [x] Orchestrator records built-in agent intents to IntentRouter for centralized logging
- [x] Unhandled rejection / uncaught exception handlers
- [x] Production-mode encryption secret validation
- [x] Request body size limit (100 KB)

### Recommended for Production
- [ ] HSM integration
- [ ] TLS/HTTPS everywhere
- [ ] API authentication
- [ ] Multi-signature wallets
- [ ] Key rotation
- [ ] Backup/recovery procedures
- [ ] Security monitoring
- [ ] Penetration testing
- [ ] Formal audit

## Incident Response

If you suspect a security breach:

1. **Stop all agents immediately**
2. **Revoke any exposed secrets**
3. **Audit transaction history**
4. **Review access logs**
5. **Report to security team**

## Responsible Disclosure

If you discover a security vulnerability:
1. **Do not** disclose publicly
2. Email security@example.com
3. Include reproduction steps
4. Allow 90 days for fix

## References

- [OWASP Top 10](https://owasp.org/Top10/)
- [Solana Security Best Practices](https://docs.solana.com/security)
- [Node.js Security Checklist](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/security/)
